doc: develop: tools: add VS Code setup guide (#74259)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/develop/tools/vscode.rst

   code.

Additional resources
********************

There are many other extensions that can be useful when working with Zephyr and VS Code. While this
guide does not cover them yet, you may refer to their documentation to set them up:

Contribution tooling
====================

- `Checkpatch Extension`_
- `EditorConfig Extension`_

Documentation languages extensions
==================================

- `reStructuredText Extension Pack`_

IDE extensions
==============

- `CMake Extension documentation`_
- `nRF Kconfig Extension`_
- `nRF DeviceTree Extension`_
- `GNU Linker Map files Extension`_

Additional guides
=================

- `How to Develop Zephyr Apps with a Modern, Visual IDE`_

.. note::

   Please be aware that these extensions might not all have the same level of quality and maintenance.

.. _Visual Studio Code: https://code.visualstudio.com/
.. _Download VS Code: https://code.visualstudio.com/Download
.. _VS Code documentation: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs
.. _C/C++ Extension Pack: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools-extension-pack

> .. _C/C++ Extension documentation: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/cpp

Author: It's especially useful for the guide writer because it contains the compile_commands.json settings documentation :stuck_out_tongue: 
The next steps would naturally exploit more of this extension's settings like the compiler.

.. _vscode_ide:

Visual Studio Code
##################

`Visual Studio Code`_ (VS Code for short) is a popular cross-platform IDE that supports C projects
and has a rich set of extensions.

This guide describes the process of setting up VS Code for Zephyr's
:zephyr:code-sample:`blinky` sample in VS Code.

The instructions have been tested on Linux. In terms of the VSCode workflow, the steps would be the

> same for macOS and Windows, but make sure to adjust the paths if needed.

Author: It is better :)

Get VS Code
***********

`Download VS Code`_ and install it.

Install the required extensions through the `Extensions` marketplace in the left panel.
Search for the `C/C++ Extension Pack`_ and install it.

Initialize a new workspace
**************************

This guide gives details on how to configure the :zephyr:code-sample:`blinky`
sample application, but the instructions would be similar for any Zephyr project and :ref:`workspace
layout <west-workspaces>`.

Before you start, make sure you have a working Zephyr development environment, as per the
instructions in the :ref:`getting_started`.

Open the project in VS Code
***************************

#. In VS Code, select :menuselection:`File --> Open Folder` from the main menu.

> #. Navigate to your Zephyr workspace and select it (i.e.the :file:`zephyrproject` folder in your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Navigate to your Zephyr workspace and select it (i.e. the :file:`zephyrproject` folder in your
```

Author: OK

*************************

In order to support code navigation and linting capabilities, you must compile your project once to
generate the :file:`compile_commands.json` file that will provide the C/C++ extension with the
required information (ex. include paths):

   .. zephyr-app-commands::
      :zephyr-app: samples/basic/blinky
      :board: native_sim/native/64
      :goals: build
      :compact:

Configure the C/C++ extension
*****************************

You'll now need to point to the generated :file:`compile_commands.json` file to enable linting and
code navigation in VS Code.

#. Go to the :menuselection:`File --> Preferences --> Settings` in the VS Code top menu.

#. Search for the parameter :guilabel:`C_Cpp > Default: Compile Commands` and set its value to:
   ``zephyr/build/compile_commands.json``.

   Linting errors in the code should now be resolved, and you should be able to navigate through the
   code.

Additional resources
********************

There are many other extensions that can be useful when working with Zephyr and VS Code. While this
guide does not cover them yet, you may refer to their documentation to set them up:

Contribution tooling

> """"""""""""""""""""

Author: Replacing all titles of the same level with `=`

- `Checkpatch Extension`_
- `EditorConfig Extension`_

Documentation languages extensions
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

- `reStructuredText Extension Pack`_
- `Markdown Preview Enhanced Extension`_

> - `Markdown All in One Extension`_

Author: They were suggested by @ycsin but indeed, I don't see any markdown file in Zephyr except CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md. I'm dropping these

IDE extensions
""""""""""""""

> - `Zephyr IDE Extension`_

Reviewer: this one will IMO cause more confusion than anything at this point, please consider dropping

Author: OK

- `nRF DeviceTree Extension`_
- `GNU Linker Map files Extension`_

Additional guides
"""""""""""""""""

- `How to Develop Zephyr Apps with a Modern, Visual IDE`_

.. note::

   Please be aware that these extensions might not all have the same level of quality and maintenance.

.. _Visual Studio Code: https://code.visualstudio.com/
.. _Download VS Code: https://code.visualstudio.com/Download
.. _VS Code documentation: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs
.. _C/C++ Extension Pack: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools-extension-pack
.. _C/C++ Extension documentation: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/cpp
.. _CMake Extension documentation: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/cpp/cmake-linux

.. _Checkpatch Extension: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=idanp.checkpatch
.. _EditorConfig Extension: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=EditorConfig.EditorConfig

.. _reStructuredText Extension Pack: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=lextudio.restructuredtext-pack
.. _Markdown Preview Enhanced Extension: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=shd101wyy.markdown-preview-enhanced

> .. _Markdown All in One Extension: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzhang.markdown-all-in-one

Reviewer: see comment re: markdown -- consider dropping

Author: OK

> .. _Zephyr IDE Extension: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mylonics.zephyr-ide

Reviewer: drop

.. _vscode_ide:

VS Code

> #######

Author: OK

.. _vscode_ide:

VS Code
#######

`Visual Studio Code`_ is a popular cross-platform IDE that supports C projects and has a rich set of

> extensions.

Author: Squashing this in my commit

This guide describes the process of setting up VS Code for Zephyr's
:zephyr:code-sample:`blinky` sample in VS Code.

The instructions have been tested on Linux. In terms of the VSCode workflow, the steps would be the
same for macOS and Windows, but make sure to adjust the paths if needed.

Get VS Code
***********

`Download VS Code`_ and install it.

Install the required extensions through the `Extensions` marketplace in the left panel.

> Search for the `C/C++ Extension Pack`_ and install it.

Author: The C/C++ extension pack already contains CMake tools.
I'm going to add the most promising Zephyr extensions, but it is important to note that there is no guarantee they are going to be maintained at this point.
Also listing the companion tools suggested by @ycsin

> Search for the `C/C++ Extension Pack`_ and install it.

Reviewer: > The C/C++ extension pack already contains CMake tools.

Duh, of course. I had only installed "C/C++", when testing, not "C/C++ *extension pack*" so of course the former didn't give me CMake Tools :)

Initialize a new workspace
**************************

This guide gives details on how to configure the :zephyr:code-sample:`blinky`
sample application, but the instructions would be similar for any Zephyr project and :ref:`workspace
layout <west-workspaces>`.

Before you start, make sure you have a working Zephyr development environment, as per the
instructions in the :ref:`getting_started`.

Open the project in VS Code
***************************

#. In VS Code, select :menuselection:`File --> Open Folder` from the main menu.

#. Navigate to your Zephyr workspace (i.e.the :file:`zephyrproject` folder in your HOME directory if
   you have followed the Getting Started instructions), then select

>    :file:`zephyr/samples/basic/blinky` or another sample project folder.

Reviewer: This needs to be consistent with the build instructions that follow -- if you instruct the user to builder from `zephyrproject/zephyr` then that's what they should be opening in VS code. If they open the blinky folder, there won't be a `build/compile_commands.json` file in it since it's in `zephyrproject/zephyr`

Author: I didn't see that! Updating all paths to be coherent with $HOME/zephyrproject/zephyr/samples/basic/blinky.

#. If prompted, enable workspace trust.

Generate compile commands
*************************

> #. The setup showcased in this document relies on the `compile_commands.json` file generated by CMake
>    to provide code navigation and linting capabilities. To generate this file, you need to enable the
>    generation of this file through the following configuration:
> 
> #. Open your projects' CMakeLists.txt file and add the following line.
>    In our case, we will add it to the :file:`samples/basic/blinky/CMakeLists.txt` file.
>    ``set(CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS ON)``
> 
> #. Build the project to generate the `compile_commands.json` file:
>    ``west build -b native_posix_64 samples/basic/blinky``

Reviewer: Are you sure `compile_commands.json` is not already automatically generated? I think it's effectively always on?
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/main/cmake/modules/kernel.cmake#L123-L126

```suggestion
In order to support code navigation and linting capabilities, you must compile your project once to
generate the :file:`compile_commands.json` file that will provide the C/C++ extension with the
required information (ex. include paths):

   .. zephyr-app-commands::
      :zephyr-app: samples/basic/blinky
      :board: native_sim/native/64
      :goals: build
      :compact:
```

Author: Yes it looks like this option has become the default. Integrating your suggestion which is using the neat zephyr-app-commands macro I'll keep in mind ;)

Configure the C/C++ extension
*****************************

> You'll now need to point to the generated `compile_commands.json` file to enable linting and code

Author: I'm adding :file: before all `compile_commands.json` mentions

navigation in VS Code.

#. Go to the :menuselection:`File --> Preferences --> Settings` in the VS Code top menu.

#. Search for the parameter :guilabel:`C_Cpp.default.compileCommands` and copy this path:

>    ``build/compile_commands.json``.

Author: Users could use the setting ID `C_Cpp.default.compileCommands`  in the search bar more directly. But either way, the "UI" string will indeed appear in the final field so I'm going with your suggestion.
